Several years ago the Outreach Team launched a community-based initiative, Caribbean Through A Lens, encouraging community groups to identify and share information through the photo sharing website Flickr. At the time, we posted several of the images from CO 1069/415 online but unfortunately did not glean much information about the names of people or places within the album. Fortunately, a recent visit from an American academic, Dr Barbara Paca, Cultural Envoy to Antigua and Barbuda, led to a meeting with an elderly resident of Antigua now living in the UK. Mr Jules Walter, an historian and a retired actor, came into the archives and was able to identify key personalities in the album. This in turn inspired me to do further research and dig into the colourful character that was Oliver Baldwin.

Oliver Ridsdale Baldwin, (1899-1958) was an atypical Governor of the Leewards Islands between 1948 and 1950 during a difficult economic period for the Caribbean Islands. He was a socialist – a philanthropic, gregarious and generous character with a strong intellect who did not stand on ceremony. Looking at the records, it seems that his behaviour and actions may have caused alarm and fear among the islands elite. The National Archives possesses two important files relating to his period of office: a Colonial Office photographic album (CO 1069/415) compiled by his private secretary, Ross Hutchinson, and a more officious file (CO 537/4884) relating to the controversy surrounding his recall to London by Secretary of State for the Colonies, Arthur Creech Jones, in February 1949.

Baldwin was the eldest son of Stanley Baldwin, Conservative Prime Minister from 1924 to 1929 and 1935 to 1937. He had become a Labour MP in 1929, but on the death of his father inherited the title Earl Baldwin of Bewdley. 2

In January 1948, he accepted the role of Governor of the Leewards – Antigua, Montserrat, Barbuda and St Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla. Arriving in Antigua on 23 March, he sought to bind the community together and improve the economic and social infrastructure of the islands. In attempting to do this he would disturb the equilibrium of social hierarchy existing on the islands between a minority white plantocracy and the thousands of ordinary black or mixed race labourers who toiled in the islands sugar plantations. Moreover, the documents suggest that he was distrusted by civil servants in London and by some of the colonial elite within the Caribbean sphere itself. On his appointment in March 1948, the ‘Crown Colonist’, mouthpiece of the colonial elite, criticised the Labour administration for appointing ‘someone with no experience whatever in the difficult art of Colonial administration’. 3

Baldwin wanted to see the different classes and racial types within the Leewards come together. He had a journalistic and theatrical background, having put on amateur plays and musicals in 1930s London. He had also worked in Intelligence during the war. Arriving in Antigua he was shocked by the chasm existing between rich and poor and sought to address this. In an early letter home he stated, ‘There is a great deal to do, I find the owners thinking I have a bomb in each pocket and the black workers expect me to bring them a new world.’ 4

He felt that the economy of the islands needed diversification (its economy was 85% dependent on the export of sugar), that its water supply needed to be improved, that innovations in trade with the mother country should be prioritised and that its health service, with the provision of a new Antiguan hospital, was urgently required. Evidence in the photo album demonstrates his attempts to bridge the social gap: he invited the poor to social occasions in Government House, St Johns. He recorded in a letter home, that he ‘went to a dance in aid of the hospital and danced with the blackest woman in the room, much to the annoyance of the whites’. 5 He actively sponsored the relatively new Steel Bands, perhaps even naming a few – ‘Red Army’, ‘Brute Force’ and ‘Hell’s Gate’ – allowing them to play outside Government House and community fetes. 6